*Table 3. Extrapolation on the last holdout time point for the Brain Regeneration dataset.*

| Sampling | Method | $\lambda$ | $\alpha$ | Weighted $\mathcal{W}_2$ | $\mathcal{W}_2$ | MMD | Energy |
| :--- | :--- | :---: | :---: | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Next Step | CFM | -- | -- | $7.124 \pm 0.443$ | $7.133 \pm 0.533$ | $0.275 \pm 0.011$ | $76.947 \pm 5.661$ |
| | MOTFM | -- | -- | $7.619 \pm 0.611$ | $7.769 \pm 0.763$ | $0.272 \pm 0.007$ | $85.352 \pm 8.140$ |
| | CTF-C | 1 | 0.5 | $6.968 \pm 0.608$ | $6.969 \pm 0.628$ | $0.265 \pm 0.009$ | $77.025 \pm 6.056$ |
| | | 0 | 0.5 | $7.244 \pm 0.804$ | $7.146 \pm 0.775$ | $0.265 \pm 0.003$ | $80.424 \pm 10.376$ |
| | | 0.5 | 0.5 | $7.188 \pm 0.391$ | $\mathbf{6.931 \pm 0.260}$ | $0.267 \pm 0.005$ | $78.992 \pm 6.195$ |
| | CTF-H | 0 | -- | $\mathbf{6.914 \pm 0.471}$ | $7.198 \pm 0.726$ | $0.266 \pm 0.009$ | $\mathbf{76.149 \pm 8.436}$ |
| | | 1 | -- | $7.505 \pm 0.667$ | $7.338 \pm 0.601$ | $\mathbf{0.263 \pm 0.006}$ | $83.425 \pm 8.793$ |
| | | 0.5 | -- | $7.243 \pm 0.479$ | $7.157 \pm 0.641$ | $0.270 \pm 0.007$ | $79.826 \pm 8.067$ |
| IVP | CFM | -- | -- | $6.633 \pm 1.312$ | $7.116 \pm 1.084$ | $0.143 \pm 0.037$ | $60.573 \pm 21.756$ |
| | MOTFM | -- | -- | $6.503 \pm 0.720$ | $6.352 \pm 0.592$ | $0.162 \pm 0.038$ | $56.452 \pm 15.932$ |
| | CTF-C | 1 | 0.5 | $6.260 \pm 0.616$ | $7.681 \pm 4.003$ | $0.157 \pm 0.039$ | $52.478 \pm 12.010$ |
| | | 0 | 0.5 | $6.614 \pm 0.710$ | $6.854 \pm 0.740$ | $0.201 \pm 0.023$ | $70.370 \pm 9.099$ |
| | | 0.5 | 0.5 | $6.696 \pm 0.427$ | $6.481 \pm 0.387$ | $0.195 \pm 0.024$ | $66.212 \pm 3.542$ |
| | CTF-H | 0 | -- | $6.243 \pm 0.760$ | $6.220 \pm 0.751$ | $0.195 \pm 0.020$ | $61.316 \pm 10.288$ |
| | | 1 | -- | $\mathbf{5.277 \pm 0.936}$ | $6.021 \pm 1.192$ | $\mathbf{0.099 \pm 0.007}$ | $\mathbf{27.777 \pm 8.621}$ |
| | | 0.5 | -- | $6.254 \pm 0.819$ | $\mathbf{5.973 \pm 0.757}$ | $0.156 \pm 0.025$ | $54.330 \pm 12.089$ |

**Sampling.** A trained velocity field can be evaluated through the samples it generates. We consider two variants of sampling configurations: *initial value problem sampling* (IVP) and *next-step sampling* (Next Step). In particular, IVP integrates the learned gradients from the first observed batch of cells and evolves them to a later time point. IVP provides the most comprehensive evaluation of flow quality, as errors can accumulate across steps. In contrast, Next Step integrates the gradient only from the most recently observed batch of cells, thus limiting error propagation but providing a less stringent test of long-term trajectory fidelity.

### 4.1. Axolotl Brain Regeneration

We first evaluate ContextFlow on longitudinal Stereo-seq spatial transcriptomic data coming from a post-traumatic brain regeneration study of the Salamander (axolotl telencephalon) species (Wei et al., 2022). The dataset contains samples from five developmental stages, with replicates collected from different individual organisms at each stage. For our CTF-C method, we present the best ablated $\alpha$, with full ablation results across different $\alpha$ values in Appendix H.

For interpolation, we hold out the middle time point during training and evaluate it using samples generated by the trained velocity field $u_\theta$ via both IVP and next-step sampling. Table 2 presents the results. Across multiple evaluation metrics, ContextFlow with entropy regularization (CTF-H) produces trajectories that most closely match the ground truth. CTF-H consistently achieves the best or comparable performance relative to CTF-C, despite the latter being explicitly tuned across multiple $\alpha$ values. This highlights the computational efficiency and superior generalization ability of CTF-H, as it avoids the need for additional hyperparameter tuning while maintaining strong performance.

For extrapolation, we evaluate generation at the last holdout time point, which represents the most challenging test of generalizability for the velocity fields $u_\theta$, as it lies outside the training time horizon. As shown in Table 3, CTF-H again consistently achieves the best overall performance, particularly under IVP-Sampling, where errors are most likely to accumulate. This result further reinforces the robustness and reliability of CTF-H across the entire sampling horizon. Figure 4 in Appendix G.1 further illustrates that incorporating spatial priors enables ContextFlow to produce substantially fewer biologically implausible couplings compared to its context-free counterpart.

### 4.2. Mouse Embryo Organogenesis

We further evaluated ContextFlow on the larger Mouse Organogenesis Spatiotemporal Atlas (MOSTA) Stereo-seq dataset (Chen et al., 2022) spanning measurements from 8 developmental time points. For the interpolation study of this dataset, we held out time point 5 during training and evaluated its generation during testing. Table 4 shows the evaluation results. We observe that ContextFlow, with both integration strategies, outperforms MOTFM across all metrics, showcasing the effectiveness of the contextual information. While CTF-C shows stronger performance under next-step sampling—albeit only after fine-tuning the tradeoff parameter $\alpha$—CTF-H consistently outperforms it in the more challenging IVP-Sampling setting. On the extrapolation task, integrating to the final time point, CTF-H again achieves the strongest performance, underscoring that the entropy-regularized formulation not only removes the need for additional parameter tuning but also offers more robust generalization to unseen temporal horizons.

Figure 2 reports the KL-Divergence between normalized his-