first so that the reconstructed past provides clean context for generating future states. In each sampling step, TDiF estimates the original clean data; the DDIM update rule then combines this prediction with a derived noise term to compute the next latent state. Once the latent sequence is fully generated, the frozen VAE decoder maps the latent vectors back to high-dimensional gene expression counts (Fig. 1a).

Benchmarking (using different datasets and metrics) against various alternative models, ranging from diffusion and flow matching approaches to neural ordinary and stochastic differential equations (ODE/SDE), show that CellPace achieves superior performance in generating realistic samples from noise in simulation (generating samples similar to the training set), in interpolation (generating samples corresponding to unseen intermediate timepoints), and in extrapolation (predicting future cellular states beyond the range of the training data) (Fig. 1e-1f). Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 1 provide the summary ranking of CellPace compared to other methods on the above three tasks that will be discussed in detail, and using additional analyses, in subsections below.

While CellPace was primarily designed for single-cell transcriptomic simulation, interpolation, and extrapolation across known developmental time, we show that it can be adapted to support multi-omics data (including 10x Genomics RNA–ATAC multiome measurements) and generation from pseudotime.

### CellPace accurately simulates retinal progenitor populations at observed developmental stages

Since CellPace is a generative model, it can generate new transcriptomic profiles from noise. We first asked whether the generated profiles, corresponding to the developmental stages that it has seen during training, capture the distribution and temporal structure of real experimental data (a requirement for its utility as a simulator). We focused on data corresponding to the temporal progression of mouse retinal progenitor cells (RPC) from a recent study [15]. RPCs are multipotent cells that divide and differentiate into multiple retinal cell types, including photoreceptors (rods and cones), horizontal cells, amacrine cells and ganglion cells, as the layered retina is assembled during development [16, 17]. We used the somite count as the temporal measure of the developmental stage and retained 3,000 highly variable genes (HVG) for analysis. The RPC dataset contained 35,275 cells from 31 stages (with somite counts ranging between 0 to 34). We used 28,389 cells from 26 stages for training and validation, while five stages were completely held out as the test set to assess interpolation and extrapolation (discussed in subsequent sections).

<br>
<p align="right">7</p>