the somite count for the real dataset, as well as data generated by all models. CellPace aligned well with the real data (Pearson $r = 0.98$, p-value $= 2.4\text{E-}20$) and achieved the lowest 1-Wasserstein (W1) and second lowest 2-Wasserstein (W2) distance (after scIMF). However, it is important to note that unlike CellPace whose data was generated from noise, scIMF required (and received) real cells from the initial timepoint as the starting point for generation. To assess local fidelity, we computed the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistics comparing pseudotime distributions within each somite (Fig. 2i), which revealed CellPace to have the smallest mean across all models. Collectively, these analyses show that CellPace accurately captures the temporal structure of the real data.

### CellPace exhibits strong performance in temporal interpolation and forecasting

We next asked whether CellPace could generate transcriptomic profile of cells for intermediate unseen states (interpolation) as well as temporal forecasting (extrapolation). Due to its architecture and design, CellPace learns the temporal relationship of samples using an ordinal or continuous variable of time (e.g., somite number to represent developmental stage), and supports generation in unseen timepoints. Among the models discussed earlier, scNODE and scIMF support generation in arbitrary timepoints via ODE/SDE integration but require initial real cells as input. scDiffusion is the only other model that natively supports interpolation but does not support extrapolation for temporal forecasting. CFGen, ESCFD, and cfDiffusion are designed to be trained with categorical variables and do not support interpolation or extrapolation.

To enable comparison against models that do not allow predictions for unseen stages, we utilized a post-hoc approach: we obtained intermediate-stage predictions by pairwise interpolation between neighbouring training stages, and we generated future-stage predictions by autoregressive linear extrapolation from the two most recent observed stages. For the extrapolation task, we used the last two stages (somite count of 33 and 34) as the test set. For interpolation, however, we carefully analyzed different stages of the RPC dataset and selected three stages that reflected different levels of prediction difficulty as our test sets (Methods): easy (somite count of 18), moderate (somite count of 15), and hard (somite count of 12).

<br>
<p align="right">10</p>